Add reference to ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE support in importer (#3049)
neo4j/docs-operations: modules/ROOT/pages/import.adoc

----
====

[role=label--enterprise-edition]
[[indexes-constraints-import]]
== Create/Drop indexes and constraints during import
[NOTE]
====
This feature is supported only by `block` format.
====

You can use the `--schema` option to create and populate indexes/constraints during full and incremental import by providing a Cypher script containing `CREATE INDEX|CONSTRAINT` commands.
During an incremental import, you can also use the same option to drop indexes/constraints, provided that the Cypher script contains `DROP INDEX|CONSTRAINT` commands.

For incremental import, creating and dropping indexes and constraints are available from 2025.02.

As of 2026.05, the `--schema` option allows the specification of a Graph type, using the `ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE` statement (see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/schema/graph-types/[CypherManual -> `Graph types (Preview)`]).
For `neo4j-admin database import full` the 

[[graph-type-operations--table]]
.`ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE`

> [options="header", cols="4m,6a,2m,1,2"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[options="header", cols="2m,2m"]
```

[source, sh]
----
bin/neo4j-admin database import full --nodes import/movies-header.csv,import/movies.csv.gz --nodes import/actors-header.csv,import/actors.csv.zip --relationships import/roles-header.csv,import/roles.csv.gz
----
====

[role=label--enterprise-edition]
[[indexes-constraints-import]]
== Create/Drop indexes and constraints during import
[NOTE]
====

> This feature is supported only by `block` format.

Reviewer: Which feature? Create/Drop indexes and constraints during import?

Author: Yes. Aligned is not supported.

====

You can use the `--schema` option to create and populate indexes/constraints during full and incremental import by providing a Cypher script containing `CREATE INDEX|CONSTRAINT` commands.
During an incremental import, you can also use the same option to drop indexes/constraints, provided that the Cypher script contains `DROP INDEX|CONSTRAINT` commands.

For incremental import, creating and dropping indexes and constraints are available from 2025.02.

> As of 2026.05, the `--schema` option allows the specification of a Graph type, using the `ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE` statement (see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/schema/graph-types/[CypherManual -> `Graph types (Preview)`]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of 2026.05, the `--schema` option allows you to specify a graph type, using the `ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE` statement.
See link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/schema/graph-types/[CypherManual -> `Graph types (Preview)`] for more information on graph types.
```

> For `neo4j-admin database import full` the 

Reviewer: This sentence is not finished.

[[graph-type-operations--table]]
.`ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE`
[options="header", cols="2m,2m"]
|===
| Import type
| Supported Graph type operations

|Full
|SET

| Incremental
| ADD, DROP
|===

> 

Reviewer: Could you also provide an example(s)?

Reviewer: Also, according to the release notes, this feature is available only for the full import. If that's not the case, we'll need to update the release notes before the release.

Reviewer: If it is available only for full import, then I guess it can go under Create indexes and constraints during full import. We need a link to the Cypher Manual with a description on how to use `ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE` or maybe some steps.

You can specify individual constraint statements, or starting with 2026.05, you can specify a graph type using an `ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE` statement.
For more information on graph types, see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/schema/graph-types/[CypherManual -> `Graph types (Preview)`].

The following table summarizes the supported commands and their availability per import type and version:

.Supported schema operations per import type and Neo4j and Cypher version
[options="header", width="100%", cols="1,3,2,2"]
|===
| Import type
| Supported commands
| Neo4j version
| Cypher version
.2+| Full import
| `CREATE INDEX\|CONSTRAINT` | 5.24 and later | Cypher 5 & Cypher 25
| `ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE` (only `SET`) | 2026.05 and later | Cypher 25
.3+| Incremental import
| `CREATE INDEX\|CONSTRAINT` | 2025.02 and later | Cypher 5 & Cypher 25
| `DROP INDEX\|CONSTRAINT` | 2025.02 and later | Cypher 5 & Cypher 25
// | `ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE` (`SET`, `ADD`, `DROP`, `ALTER`) | 2026.06 and later | Cypher 25
|===

> // TODO: (For the full importer only SET is supported)

Author: nit; remove comment.

// TODO: As of 2026.06: For incremental import the option becomes available as of 2026.06, limited to operations ADD, DROP, ALTER. Here you are allowed multiples of these operations.
=== Supported index and constraint types

The import tool supports the following index and constraint types:

Supported index types::
* RANGE
* LOOKUP
* POINT
* TEXT
* FULL-TEXT
* VECTOR
+

> For more information on these index types, see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/current/indexes/[Cypher Manual -> Indexes].

Author: nit; This line is strangely indented in the rendered document.

Reviewer: Because it applies to the paragraph above.

> // TODO: Verify the official constraint names.

Author: nit; remove comment

> Supported constraint types::

Reviewer 2: Speaking of terminology: on the https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/introduction/#_neo4j_editions, we use the following names: Property uniqueness constraints, Property existence constraints, Property type constraints, Node and relationship key constraints. Only "Property uniqueness constraints" are available in the Community Edition.

> * NODE PROPERTY EXISTENCE

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if we need to use upper case here. In the Cypher docs, this is just 'node property existence constraint'

> * NODE PROPERTY EXISTENCE

Reviewer 2: Property existence constraints are available in Enterprise Edition

* NODE PROPERTY UNIQUENESS

> * NODE PROPERTY KEY

Reviewer 2: Key constraints are EE feature

Reviewer: The `--schema` option is an EE feature, so I guess it doesn't matter so much whether the constraint is EE or CE.

Reviewer 2: Ah, true. It slipped my mind

> * NODE PROPERTY KEY

Reviewer 2: In the Cypher docs, they are just 'node key constraints' - without 'property'.

* NODE PROPERTY TYPE
* RELATIONSHIP PROPERTY EXISTENCE
* RELATIONSHIP PROPERTY UNIQUENESS
* RELATIONSHIP PROPERTY KEY

> * RELATIONSHIP PROPERTY TYPE

Reviewer 2: There are also 'Composite key constraints' available in EE.

> Supported constraint types via graph types::

Reviewer 2: I think it would be better to ask Jens or someone from the Cypher world to review this part. If you refer to the table on the page https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/schema/graph-types/set-graph-types/#graph-type-implementation, there are more constraints to mention:
* node property type
* relationship property type
* relationship property existence
* relationship source label
* relationship target label

> Supported constraint types via graph types::

Reviewer 2: They are available only in the Enterprise Edition

> * *Property type constraints*: label:enterprise[] ensure that a property has the required property type for all nodes with a specific label or for all relationships with a specific type.

Author: nit; It looks a bit crowded with the "enterprise" labels. Also, considering that the entire section is "Enterprise Only", maybe they are redundant?

[[create-drop-indexes-constraints-full]]
=== Create indexes and constraints during full import

You can use the `--schema` option to create and populate indexes/constraints during full import by providing a Cypher script containing `CREATE INDEX|CONSTRAINT` commands to be parsed and executed.

Starting with 2026.05, you can also specify a graph type using an `ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE` statement.
For more information on graph types, see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/schema/graph-types/[CypherManual -> `Graph types (Preview)`].

[NOTE]
====
Full import does not support dropping indexes and constraints.
For graph type it supports only `SET` operations.
====

For example:

[.tabbed-example]
=====
[role=include-with-constraint-statements]
======

._schema.cypher_ script
[source, cypher, role=nocopy]
----
CREATE INDEX PersonNameIndex IF NOT EXISTS FOR (p:Person) ON (p.name);
CREATE CONSTRAINT PersonAgeConstraint IF NOT EXISTS FOR (c:Person) REQUIRE c.age IS :: INTEGER;
CREATE CONSTRAINT PersonAgeRequiredConstraint IF NOT EXISTS FOR (c:Person) REQUIRE c.age IS NOT NULL;
----
This file uses `;` as a separator.
======
[role=include-with-graph-type-statement]

> ======

Reviewer 2: to add labels here: label:new[Introduced in 2026.05] label:cypher[Cypher 25]

._schema.cypher_ script
[source, cypher, role=nocopy]
----

> CREATE INDEX PersonNameIndex IF NOT EXISTS FOR (p:Person) ON (p.name);

Author: I made a mistake in the example. It ought to be:
```
CYPHER 25
CREATE INDEX PersonNameIndex IF NOT EXISTS FOR (p:Person) ON (p.name);
ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE SET {
    (p: person => { age :: INTEGER NOT NULL })
};
```

DROP CONSTRAINT PersonAgeConstraint IF EXISTS;
CREATE CONSTRAINT movie_title IF NOT EXISTS FOR (m:Movie) REQUIRE m.title IS UNIQUE;
----
This file uses ';' as a separator.

// TODO: As of 2026.06:
// [.tabbed-example]
// =====
// [role=include-with-constraint-statements]
// ======
//
// ._schema.cypher_ script
// [source, cypher, role=nocopy]
// ----
// DROP INDEX PersonNameIndex IF EXISTS;
// CREATE CONSTRAINT person_name IF NOT EXISTS FOR (p:Person) REQUIRE p.name IS UNIQUE;
// DROP CONSTRAINT PersonAgeConstraint IF EXISTS;
// CREATE CONSTRAINT movie_title IF NOT EXISTS FOR (m:Movie) REQUIRE m.title IS UNIQUE;
// ----
// This file uses `;` as a separator.
// ======

> // [role=include-with-graph-type-statement]

Reviewer 2: to add labels here: Introduced in 2026.06 and Cypher 25

DROP CONSTRAINT PersonAgeConstraint IF EXISTS;
CREATE CONSTRAINT movie_title IF NOT EXISTS FOR (m:Movie) REQUIRE m.title IS UNIQUE;
----
This file uses ';' as a separator.

// TODO: As of 2026.06:
// [.tabbed-example]
// =====
// [role=include-with-constraint-statements]
// ======
//
// ._schema.cypher_ script
// [source, cypher, role=nocopy]
// ----
// DROP INDEX PersonNameIndex IF EXISTS;
// CREATE CONSTRAINT person_name IF NOT EXISTS FOR (p:Person) REQUIRE p.name IS UNIQUE;
// DROP CONSTRAINT PersonAgeConstraint IF EXISTS;
// CREATE CONSTRAINT movie_title IF NOT EXISTS FOR (m:Movie) REQUIRE m.title IS UNIQUE;
// ----
// This file uses `;` as a separator.
// ======
// [role=include-with-graph-type-statement]
// ======
// label:new[Introduced in 2026.05] label:cypher[Cypher 25]
//
// ._schema.cypher_ script
// [source, cypher, role=nocopy]
// ----
// DROP INDEX PersonNameIndex IF EXISTS;

> // CYPHER 25 ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE DROP {

Author: This should be:
```
CYPHER 25
DROP INDEX PersonNameIndex IF EXISTS;
ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE DROP {
    (p: person => {age :: INTEGER NOT NULL}
}
```
Also, for now only one ALTER CURRENT GRAPH TYPE statement is allowed (this was a late addition in the development process).
